---
layout: post
title:      "Book Review: The Signal and the Noise"
date:       2020-05-17 20:02:13 +0000
permalink:  book_review_the_signal_and_the_noise
---


Wow. What can I say for Nate Silver's *The Signal and the Noise*  that hasn't already been said before. Personally, I try not to buy into the hype that circulates through our social media networks and news sources, as it oftentimes uplifts content beyond its true worth. I prefer to explore the subject of that hype for myself before making a judgment. Silver's book, however, is an anomaly (a signal perhaps) amongst the noise of these subjects, a truly exceptionaly piece of work. In particular, I felt that Nate Silver does a few things extraordinarily well in his book, which I will discuss briefly below:

1. Thoroughness
2. Objectivity
3. Consideration of Multiple Perspectives
4. Removal of Ego

**Thoroughness**

Never have I encountered a nonfiction book in which the author so thoroughly explores such a diverse range of topics in the manner that Nate Silver accomplishes throughout *The Signal and the Noise*. While he never claims to be an expert on any topic other than statistics and Bayesian predicitions (despite his sufficient experience with baseball, politics, poker, and economics - more on this in the "Removal of Ego" section below), it is abudantly clear throughout every chapter that Silver has conducted extraordinary amounts of research on each topic that he addresses. These topics range from poker games and chess to climate change and terrorism, with everything including the stock market, earthquake patterns, hurricane trajectories, and the housing bubble encompassed in his book's 450 pages. Nate Silver has clearly "become one with the data," flushing out all possible correlations, patterns, and signals amongst the noise, as he would say; much of this behind-the-scenes work is not evident to the reader, yet Silver provides the final product of this process in clear, convincing visualizations that allow the data to speak for itself. When he does not necessarily possess the expertise to fully discuss a particular topic, Silver is never hesistant to consult experts in the field, detailing countless interviews in each chapter with authorities from all across the nation. After reading the final page, I closed the book in awe of the dedication and meticulousness with which Silver must have conducted his research

**Objectivity**

As Nate Silver emphasizes throughout his entire book, objectivity is the backbone of our ability to make thoughtful, useful predictions. However, as he explains, this is not the type of sterile, scientific objectivity that we so often seek to obtain when testing our hypotheses, when we aim to extract all bias and subjectivity in hopes of isolating one single independent variable. On the contrary, Silver asserts that we must lean into our subjectivity objectively, allowing ourselves to examine how our biases influence our preconceived notions (and thus our prior probabilities), in a metacognitive way that allows us to better understand our approach to complex situations so that we can come away with more thoughtful predicitions for the future. While many authors might talk this talk, but remain unable to walk the walk, Nate Silver truly does practice what he preaches. Although a comment here and there may reveal some of his underlying subjectivities and opinions, Silver seems a mastermind of the metacognition that allows him to understand how his own biases may affect his perceptions, correcting for these as he calculates and recalculates probabilities within his models and predictions. This approach not only makes his arguments more effective, but serves as an exemplar for how we should all consider our own biases and subjectivities.

**Consideration of Multiple Perspectives**

Building off the success of his objectivity above, Silver is additionally exceptional at considering multiple perspectives on the issues in his book, addressing the strengths and weaknesses of each group's assumptions and predicitive capabilities. Given the increasing polarity of our social and political climate, this balanced approach reveals a more thoughtful, fair, and objective analysis of the facts that thus becomes more convincing as Silver weighs the validity of each predicition. This strength seemed especially relevant in the chapter on climate change, when Silver challenged our increasingly normalized assumptions of the fate of our planet, not by refuting the existance of climate change and global warming (if that were the case, I would personally take issue with his arguments), but instead by asking readers to more thoughtfully consider how far into the future we can truly make predictions about our global climate and what aspects of uncertainty will remain within those predictions. As he explains at the end of the chapter, if a prediction made with greater certainty is refuted by changes (or lack of changes) in the following decade, those predictions are less believable than if the true uncertainty is included with the original predictions. Silver's approach to the predominantly biased, partisan predictions that arise from politically-motivated interests instead provides a unifying lens through which we can better enact change and make predictions about our future.

**Removal of Ego**

This final strength I discuss is more of a personal preference than anything, although in my opinion, it does serve as the foundation for the aforementioned strengths as well, a character trait that I believe may be a cornerstone of his success in the world of statistics, data science, and predictive modeling (though I have read many news articles that may disagree with this personality description). Throughout his book at least, where many other authors might be quick to fluff their feathers and strut their stuff, Nate Silver presents himself as fairly modest and unpretentious. Especially given the success of his predicitive models in baseball and politics, Silver presents his findings in a straightforward, objective way that, at least for me, leaves the reader impressed yet unitimidated by his expertise. Where ego may have otherwise clouded his judgment and analysis of the material, Silver seems proficient in clearing away this fog metacogintively to reveal the more objective truths within the data. I've read countless books where this is not the case, the author's ego seeming to ooze from the edges between each sentence, leaving me feeling unimpressed and unconvinced, unable to see through my own personal aversion to the author's tone. Instead, Silver seeks to reveal these biases, personal preferences, and subjective analyses in others and across our society, advocating for an approach more similar to the one he appears to take. As he explains, and demonstrates throughout his own life, this is truly the only way to distinguish the signal within the noise, by acknowledging and correcting for the ways in which our perception of ourself influences  our perception of the data.

**Conclusion**

Ultimately, *The Signal and the Noise* was one of the more satisfying and thought-provoking books I have had the privilege of reading. Not only am I impressed by the dedication and passion of Nate Silver's work, but feel inspired to incorporate these practices and principles into my daily life and career. At the beginning of my journey into data science and analytical work, I hope I am able to hold these kernels of truth in the back of my mind as I seek out the signals within the noise, in our ever-increasingly noisy society.
